---
layout: page
title: Section 5.1 Calculus 2
header-img: "/assets/img/cal2-bg.png"
description: Sequences
---

[Back to Table of Contents](../..)

---

## 5.1 Sequences

### 5.1.1 Definition

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/vx3XB5mz7UY" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

- A sequence is an infinitely long list of real numbers. For example,
  the sequence of positive even integers is \\(\\<2,4,6,8,\dots\\>\\).
- **Example**
  Use your intuition to guess the next three terms of the sequences
  \\(\\<1,3,5,7,9,\dots\\>\\),
  \\(\\<3,-6,9,-12,15,\dots\\>\\), and
  \\(\\<0,1,4,9,16,\dots\\>\\).
- An explicit formula \\(a_n\\) is a rule defining each term of the
  sequence, where \\(n=0\\) yields the first term, \\(n=1\\) gives the
  next term, and so on. The sequence generated by the formula \\(a_n\\)
  is written as
  \\(\\<a_n\\>\_{n=0}^\infty=\\<a_0,a_1,a_2,\dots\\>\\).
    - Occasionally the first term of the sequence
      may be given by an integer different from \\(0\\), in which case
      the sequence is written like
      \\(\\<a_n\\>\_{n=1}^\infty\\).
- **Example**
  Write the first five terms of the sequences
  \\(\\<a_n\\>\_{n=0}^\infty\\),
  \\(\\<b_n\\>\_{n=0}^\infty\\), and
  \\(\\<c_n\\>\_{n=0}^\infty\\)
  defined by
  \\(a_n=4n\\),
  \\(b_n=\frac{(-1)^n}{n^2+2}\\), and
  \\(c_n=\cos(\frac{\pi}{2}n)\\).
- **Example** Give the term \\(a_7\\) for the sequence defined by
  the formula \\(a_n=\frac{n}{2n+1}\\).
  <!-- TODO replace previous with create a formula question -->


### 5.1.2 Recursive Formulas

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/qxtFf3g1DNI" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

- A recursive formula for a sequence defines one or more initial terms of
  the sequence, and then defines future terms of the sequence by using
  previous terms.
- **Example** Write the first ten terms of the Fibonacci sequence defined
  by the recursive formula \\(f_0=1,f_1=1,f_{n+2}=f_n+f_{n+1}\\).
- **Example** Write the first six terms of the factorial sequence defined
  by the recursive formula \\(!\_0=1,!\_{n+1}=(n+1)!\_n\\).
- The factorial sequence is commonly written in the form \\(n!\\) rather
  than \\(!\_n\\). It has the explicit formula
  \\(n!=1\times2\times3\times\dots\times n\\).
- **Example** Prove that \\(a_n=\frac{3}{2^n}\\)
  is an explicit formula for the
  sequence \\(\\<a_n\\>\_{n=0}^\infty\\) defined recursively by
  \\(a_0=3,a_{n+1}=\frac{a_n}{2}\\).

### 5.1.3 Limits, Convergence, and Divergence

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/5Zqwo5dZAaU" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

- The sequence \\(\\<a_n\\>\_{n=i}^\infty\\) converges to a limit
  \\(L\\) if for each \\(\epsilon>0\\), there exists an integer \\(N\\)
  such that \\(\|a_n-L\|<\epsilon\\) for all \\(n\geq N\\).
  This is written as \\(\lim_{n\to\infty}a_n=L\\) or
  \\(a_n\to L\\).
- **Example** Guess the limit of the harmonic sequence    
  \\(\\<a_n\\>\_{n=1}^\infty\\) defined by \\(a_n=\frac{1}{n}\\)
  by writing out the first few terms.
- **Example** Guess the limit of the sequence    
  defined by \\(g_n=\frac{2^n}{2^{n+1}}\\)
  by writing out the first few terms.
- A sequence diverges when it doesn't converge to any limit.
- **Example** Write a few terms of the sequence defined by the formula
  \\(b_n=(-1)^n\frac{n+1}{n+2}\\). Does it appear to be converging or
  diverging?

---

### Review Exercises

1.  Use your intuition to guess the next three terms of the sequences
    \\(\\<1,5,9,13,17,\dots\\>\\),
    \\(\\<1,\frac{1}{4},\frac{1}{9},\frac{1}{16},\frac{1}{25},\dots\\>\\), and
    \\(\\<\frac{1}{3},-1,3,-9,27,\dots\\>\\).
1.  Create an explicit formula for each of the three previous sequences.
1.  Write the first five terms of the sequences
    \\(\\<a_n\\>\_{n=0}^\infty\\),
    \\(\\<b_n\\>\_{n=0}^\infty\\), and
    \\(\\<c_n\\>\_{n=0}^\infty\\)
    defined by
    \\(a_n=3n+2\\),
    \\(b_n=2(-\frac{1}{3})^n\\), and
    \\(c_n=\frac{n}{1+n^2}\\).
1.  Write the first six terms of the sequence \\(\\<q_n\\>\_{n=0}^\infty\\)
    defined by \\(q_0=0\\) and \\(q_{n+1}=q_n+2n+1\\).
1.  Prove that \\(q_n=n^2\\) is an explicit formula for the
    sequence defined recursively in the previous problem.
1.  Write the first six terms of the sequence \\(\\<b_n\\>\_{n=1}^\infty\\)
    defined by \\(b_1=4\\) and \\(b_{n+1}=\frac{b_n}{2}\\).
1.  Prove that \\(b_n=\frac{8}{2^n}\\) is an explicit formula for the
    sequence defined recursively in the previous problem.
1.  Guess the limit of the alternating harmonic sequence    
    \\(\\<b_n\\>\_{n=1}^\infty\\) defined by \\(b_n=\frac{(-1)^n}{n}\\)
    by writing out the first few terms.
1.  Guess the limit of the geometric sequence    
    \\(\\<g_n\\>\_{n=0}^\infty\\) defined by \\(g_n=2^{-n}\\)
    by writing out the first few terms.
1.  Guess the limit of the sequence    
    \\(\\<a_n\\>\_{n=3}^\infty\\) defined by \\(a_n=\frac{3n+2}{2n+1}\\)
    by writing out the first few terms.
1.  Write a few terms of the sequence defined by the formula
    \\(c_n=\frac{n!}{n^2+1}\\). Does it appear to be converging or
    diverging?
1.  Write a few terms of the sequence defined by the formula
    \\(s_n=\sin(\frac{\pi n}{3})\\). Does it appear to be converging or
    diverging?
1.  Sketch a picture which explains why
    \\(\lim_{n\to\infty} \sin(\pi n)=0\\) as the limit of a
    sequence, but \\(\lim_{x\to\infty}\sin(\pi x)\\)
    does not exist as a limit of a function.
1.  What are the first five terms of the sequence \\(\\<r_n\\>\_{n=1}^\infty\\)
    defined explicitly by \\(r_n=\frac{n+2}{3+n^2}\\)?
1.  What are the first five terms of the sequence \\(\\<w_n\\>\_{n=0}^\infty\\)
    defined recursively by \\(w_0=1\\), \\(w_1=2\\),
    \\(w_{n+2}=2w_n+w_{n+1}\\)?
1.  Which of these statements seems most appropriate for describing the
    sequence whose initial terms are
    \\(\\<1,\frac{3}{4},\frac{5}{8},\frac{9}{16},\frac{17}{32},\dots\\>\\)?
    - The sequence appears to converge to \\(\frac{1}{2}\\).
    - The sequence appears to diverge to \\(\frac{1}{2}\\).
    - The sequence appears to neither converge nor diverge.

[Solutions 1-7](/resources/calculus2/solutions/5.1a.pdf)

[Solutions 8-16](/resources/calculus2/solutions/5.1b.pdf)

---

#### Textbook References

- University Calculus: Early Transcendentals (3rd Ed)
    - 9.1
