---
layout: page
title: Section 5.2 Calculus 2
header-img: "/assets/img/cal2-bg.png"
description: Computing Limits of Sequences
---

[Back to Table of Contents](../..)

---

## 5.2 Computing Limits of Sequences

### 5.2.1 Limits of Sequences and Functions

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/lEqbxJeq9_M" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

- If \\(f(x)\\) is a function and \\(a_n\\) is a sequence such that
  \\(f(n)=a_n\\) for sufficiently large integers \\(n\\), then
  \\(\lim_{x\to\infty}f(x)=L\\) implies \\(\lim_{n\to\infty}a_n=L\\).
- Therefore all the rules for evaluating \\(\lim_{x\to\infty}f(x)\\)
  extend to evaluating \\(\lim_{n\to\infty}a_n\\).
- **Example** Use factoring to compute
  \\(\lim_{n\to\infty}\frac{4+n}{n^3+1}\\).
- **Example** Use L'Hopital's Rule to prove that any sequence
  defined by the formula \\(a_n=\frac{n^2+3}{4-5n^2}\\) converges to
  \\(-\frac{1}{5}\\).
- **Example** Use the squeeze theorem to compute
  \\(\lim_{n\to\infty}\frac{\sin n}{n}\\).

### 5.2.2 Common Limits

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/--o02u0BdUo" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

- The following limits are often useful:
    - \\(\lim_{n\to\infty} x = x\\)
    - \\(\lim_{n\to\infty} \frac{1}{n} = 0\\)
    - \\(\lim_{n\to\infty} \frac{\ln n}{n} = 0\\)
    - \\(\lim_{n\to\infty} \sqrt[n]{p(n)} = 1\\) where \\(p(n)\\)
      is a polynomial
    - \\(\lim_{n\to\infty} x^n = 0\\), \\(\|x\|<1\\)
    - \\(\lim_{n\to\infty} (1+\frac{x}{n})^n=e^x\\)
    - \\(\lim_{n\to\infty} \frac{x^n}{n!}=0\\)
- **Example** Find \\(\lim_{n\to\infty}\frac{\ln(n^3)}{n}\\).
- **Example** Find \\(\lim_{n\to\infty}\frac{3^n+1}{n!}\\).
- **Example** Find \\(\lim_{n\to\infty}(4n)^{1/n}\\).

### 5.2.3 Monotonic and Bounded Sequences

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/fVx-4y-N-P0" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

- A sequence \\(\\<a_n\\>\_{n=i}^\infty\\) is bounded if there exist
  real numbers \\(A,B\\) such that \\(A\leq a_n\leq B\\) for all integers
  \\(n\geq i\\).
- **Example** Is the sequence \\(\\<a_n\\>\_{n=1}^\infty\\)
  where \\(a_n=\frac{n+1}{n}\\) bounded?
- **Example** Is the sequence \\(\\<b_n\\>\_{n=0}^\infty\\)
  given by \\(b_n=\frac{n}{(-3)^n}\\) bounded?
- A sequence is monotonic if it either never increases or never decreases.
- **Example** Is the sequence \\(\\<a_n\\>\_{n=1}^\infty\\)
  where \\(a_n=\frac{n+1}{n}\\) monotonic?
- **Example** Is the sequence \\(\\<b_n\\>\_{n=0}^\infty\\)
  given by \\(b_n=\frac{n}{(-3)^n}\\) monotonic?
- The Monotonic Sequence Theorem states that
  all bounded monotonic sequences converge.

### Exercises for 5.2

1.  Use factoring to compute
    \\(\displaystyle\lim_{n\to\infty}\frac{n-4n^2}{2n^2+7}\\).
1.  Use L'Hopital's Rule to prove that
    \\(\displaystyle\frac{\ln n}{n}\to 0\\).
1.  Use the squeeze theorem to compute
    \\(\displaystyle\lim_{n\to\infty}\frac{\cos n}{n\ln n}\\).
1.  Find \\(\displaystyle\lim_{n\to\infty}\frac{\sin n + 3n^2}{n^2+1}\\).
1.  Find \\(\displaystyle\lim_{n\to\infty}\frac{\ln(n^n)}{n^2}\\).
1.  Find \\(\displaystyle\lim_{n\to\infty}(5n^3)^{2/n}\\).
1.  Find \\(\displaystyle\lim_{n\to\infty}(\frac{1}{\pi})^{3n}\\).
1.  Find \\(\displaystyle\lim_{n\to\infty}(\frac{1}{2}+\frac{1}{n})^n\\).
1.  Find
    \\(\displaystyle\lim_{n\to\infty}
    \frac{\frac{(n+2)!}{2^n}}{\frac{3n^2n!}{2^{n+1}}}\\).
1.  Based on its first few terms, does the sequence
    \\(\\<a_n\\>\_{n=2}^\infty\\)
    where \\(a_n=\frac{2+n^2}{n^2-1}\\) appear bounded? Monotonic?
    Does it appear to converge?
1.  Based on its first few terms, does the sequence
    \\(\\<b_n\\>\_{n=0}^\infty\\)
    where \\(b_n=(-3)^n\\) appear bounded? Monotonic?
    Does it appear to converge?
1.  Based on its first few terms, does the sequence
    \\(\\<y_n\\>\_{n=1}^\infty\\)
    where \\(y_n=(-\frac{1}{2})^n\\) appear bounded? Monotonic?
    Does it appear to converge?
1.  Prove that \\(\displaystyle\lim_{n\to\infty} (1+\frac{x}{n})^n=e^x\\) by
    considering the function version
    \\(\displaystyle L=\lim_{t\to\infty} (1+\frac{x}{t})^t\\) and taking
    the natural log of both sides of the equality. Use L'Hopital
    to solve this limit, showing that \\(\ln L=x\\) and therefore
    \\(L=e^x\\).
1.  Find \\(\lim_{n\to\infty}\frac{n!\cos n}{(n+1)!}\\).
1.  Find \\(\lim_{n\to\infty}\frac{(3+n)^n}{n^n}\\).
1.  Which of these statements seems most appropriate for describing the
    sequence whose initial terms are
    \\(\\<\frac{1}{4},-\frac{1}{6},\frac{1}{8},-\frac{1}{10},
    \frac{1}{12},\dots\\>\\)?
    - The sequence is bounded and monotonic, so it converges by
      the Monotonic Sequence Theorem.
    - The sequence is not monotonic and not bounded, so it diverges by
      the Monotonic Sequence Theorem.
    - The sequence is bounded, but not monotonic, so the Monotonic Sequence
      Theorem doesn't apply. However, it does
      appear to converge to \\(0\\) anyway.

[Solutions 1-13](/resources/calculus2/solutions/5.2a.pdf)

[Solutions 14-16](/resources/calculus2/solutions/5.2b.pdf)

---

### Textbook References

- University Calculus: Early Transcendentals (3rd Ed)
    - 9.1
