---
layout: page
title: Section 5.5 Calculus 2
header-img: "/assets/img/cal2-bg.png"
description: The Integral Test
---

## 5.5 The Integral Test

### 5.5.1 Improper Integrals

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/xDj8Ne8ISHQ" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

- If \\(f(x)\geq 0\\), the improper integral
  \\(\int_a^\infty f(x)\,dx=\lim_{b\to\infty}\int_a^b f(x)\,dx\\)
  represents the area under the curve \\(y=f(x)\\) from \\(x=a\\) out
  to \\(\infty\\). If the limit exists,
  then the improper integral converges; otherwise it diverges.
- **Example** Does \\(\int_1^\infty\frac{1}{x^2}\,dx\\) converge or diverge?
  If it converges, what is its value?
- **Example** Does \\(\int_4^\infty\frac{1}{2\sqrt y}\,dy\\)
  converge or diverge?
  If it converges, what is its value?
- When an integrand is undefined at a bound of integration,
  then the integral is also called
  improper and is evaluated with a limit.
- **Example** Find the value of \\(\int_0^8 z^{-1/3}\,dz\\).

### 5.5.2 The Integral Test

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Hbdj83xTMq4" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

- If \\(a_n=f(n)\\) where \\(f(x)\\) is a continuous, positive, decreasing
  function for sufficiently large values of \\(x\\), then
  the series \\(\sum_{n=N}^\infty a_n\\) and improper integral
  \\(\int_a^\infty f(x)\,dx\\) either both converge, or both diverge.
- **Example** Does \\(\sum_{n=4}^\infty\frac{4n+4}{n^2+2n+1}\\) converge or
  diverge?
- **Example** Does \\(\sum_{k=1}^\infty\frac{k}{e^{k^2}}\\) converge or diverge?
- Even when they both converge,
  the values of the series \\(\sum_{n=N}^\infty a_n\\) and improper integral
  \\(\int_N^\infty f(x)\,dx\\) usually differ.
- **Example** Show that
  \\(\sum_{n=1}^\infty\frac{1}{n^3}\not=\int_1^\infty\frac{1}{x^3}\,dx\\).

### 5.5.3 The \\(p\\)-Series Test

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/ceteDtCMKIg" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

- The \\(p\\)-Series Test states that the series
  \\(\sum_{n=1}^\infty\frac{1}{n^p}\\) converges when \\(p>1\\),
  and diverges when \\(p\leq 1\\).
- **Example**
  Does \\(\sum_{m=2}^\infty\frac{3}{\sqrt[10]{m^4}}\\) converge or diverge?
- **Example**
  Does \\(\sum_{j=0}^\infty\frac{1}{j^2+2j+1}\\) converge or diverge?

---

### Review Exercises

1.  Does \\(\int_2^\infty\frac{32}{x^3}\,dx\\) converge or diverge?
    If it converges, what is its value?
1.  Does \\(\int_0^\infty\frac{2y}{y^2+3}\,dy\\)
    converge or diverge?
    If it converges, what is its value?
1.  Does \\(\int_e^\infty\frac{1}{\ln(x^x)}\,dx\\) converge or diverge?
    If it converges, what is its value?
1.  Show that
    \\(\int_1^\infty\frac{1}{x^2}\,dx+1=\int_0^1\frac{1}{\sqrt y}\,dy\\).
    Then draw a sketch involving areas illustrating why they are equal.
1.  Does \\(\sum_{n=0}^\infty\frac{2n}{n^2+3}\\) converge or diverge?
1.  Does \\(\sum_{n=3}^\infty\frac{4}{n(\ln n)^3}\\) converge or diverge?
1.  Does \\(\sum_{n=-2}^\infty\frac{1}{e^n}\\) converge or diverge?
1.  Show that
    \\(
      \int_1^\infty\frac{1}{x^2}\,dx
    \not=
      \sum_{n=1}^\infty\frac{1}{n^2}
    \\), even though they both converge.
1.  Does \\(\sum_{k=100}^\infty\frac{5}{\sqrt[7]{k^6}}\\) converge or diverge?
1.  Does \\(\sum_{n=5}^\infty\frac{1}{n^2-8n+16}\\) converge or diverge?
1.  Does \\(\sum_{n=-1}^\infty\frac{e^n}{1+e^{2n}}\\) converge
    or diverge? (Hint: \\(\int\frac{1}{1+u^2}\,du=\tan^\leftarrow u+C\\)
    and \\(\lim_{u\to\infty}\tan^\leftarrow u=\frac{\pi}{2}\\).)
1.  Does \\(\sum_{m=0}^\infty\frac{2m}{(m^2+1)^2}\\) converge or
    diverge?
1.  Does \\(\sum_{n=2}^\infty\frac{1}{\sqrt{n-1}}\\) converge or
    diverge?


[Solutions 1-6](/resources/calculus2/solutions/5.5a.pdf)

[Solutions 7-13](/resources/calculus2/solutions/5.5b.pdf)

---

### Textbook References

- University Calculus: Early Transcendentals (3rd Ed)
    - 8.7, 9.3
