---
layout: page
title: Section 5.8 Calculus 2
header-img: "/assets/img/cal2-bg.png"
description: Strategies to Determine Series Convergence
---

## 5.8 Strategies to Determine Series Convergence


### 5.8.1 Identifying Appropriate Strategies for Inspecting Series

- When encountering a series, it's useful to spot
  certain traits that can identify the best series convergence test
  to apply. The following list isn't fool-proof, but checking these
  in order can help you identify useful techniques to determine series
  convergence.
    1. Is the **value** of a convergent series asked for? If so, it
       is likely a telescoping or geometric series.
    1. Is the **sequence limit** of its terms **non-zero**? If so,
       it diverges by the Series Divergence Test. (The opposite is NOT true.)
    1. Is the series of the form \\(\sum ar^n\\)? If so, it is a geometric
       series.
    1. Do the series terms **alternate** due to a multiplier of \\((-1)^n\\)
       or similar? If so, it is likely an alternating series.
    1. Is the series of the form \\(\sum\frac{a}{n^p}\\)? If so, it is a
       \\(p\\)-series.
    1. Does the series involve **factorials**? If so, the Ratio Test
       may be effective (but fails when the limit equals \\(1\\)).
    1. Does the series involve **exponents**? If so, the Root Test
       may be effective (but fails when the limit equals \\(1\\)).
    1. Can the series be **slightly modified** to a geometric or \\(p\\)-series?
       If so, then either the Direct or Limit Comparison Test may be effective.
- Note that the starting index (the bottom of the \\(\sum\\)) does not affect
  whether a series converges or diverges (but it does affect the value of a
  convergent series).

---

### Review Exercises

1. Does \\(\sum_{m=1}^\infty(-1)^{m-1}\frac{m+1}{2m}\\) converge or diverge?
1. Does \\(\sum_{n=0}^\infty\frac{n+3}{3^n}\\) converge or diverge?
1. Does \\(\sum_{k=0}^\infty 7^{1-k}\\) converge or diverge? If it converges,
   what is its value?
1. Does \\(\sum_{j=4}^\infty\frac{5^j}{(2j)!}\\) converge or diverge?
1. Does \\(\sum_{n=3}^\infty\frac{1}{n^2+n}\\) converge or diverge?
   If it converges, what is its value?
1. Does \\(\sum_{k=1}^\infty(1+\frac{1}{k})^k\\) converge or diverge?
1. Does \\(\sum_{m=2}^\infty5(-\frac{4}{9})^{m+1}\\) converge or diverge?
1. Does \\(\sum_{n=0}^\infty\frac{n^3+n+7}{n^5+5n^2}\\) converge or diverge?
1. Does \\(\sum_{k=10}^\infty\frac{4}{\sqrt[3]{k}}\\) converge or diverge?
1. For what values of \\(x\\) does
   \\(\sum_{n=0}^\infty \frac{x^n}{n^2}\\) converge?
