---
layout: page
title: Section 3.5 Calculus 2
header-img: "/assets/img/cal2-bg.png"
description: Work
---

[Back to Table of Contents](../..)

---

## 3.5 Work

### 3.5.1 Work by a Constant Force

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/YYrV6D_KMI8" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

- In physics, the work \\(W\\) done by a force of constant magnitude \\(F\\)
  over a displacement \\(d\\) by the formula \\(W=Fd\\).
- **Example** Calculate the work done by a crane in lifting a \\(3000\\) pound
  wrecking ball \\(25\\) feet.
- **Example** Estimate the work done in lifting a leaky bucket of water
  \\(1\\) meter off the ground if it weighs approximately
  \\(4\\) newtons on the ground,
  \\(3.8\\) newtons at \\(25\\) cm,
  \\(3.5\\) newtons at \\(50\\) cm,
  and \\(2.3\\) newtons at \\(75\\) cm.

### 3.5.2 Work by a Variable Force

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/23-AT2qLE1o" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

- If the force \\(F(x)\\) acting on an object varies with respect to the
  position \\(x\\) of the object, then work done in moving the object from
  \\(a\\) to \\(b\\) is defined by \\(W=\int_a^b F(x)\,dx\\).
- **Example** Find the work done in lifting a leaky bucket of water \\(1\\)
  meter off the ground if it weighs \\(4-3x^2\\) newtons when it is
  \\(x\\) meters above the ground.
- **Example** How much work is done in pulling up \\(20\\) feet of
  hanging chain if it weighs \\(1\\) pound per \\(4\\) feet?

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/yjcRyJDj5dM" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

- **Example** Hooke's Law states that the force required to hold
  a stretched or compressed spring is directly proportional to its
  natural length. That is, \\(F(x)=kx\\) where \\(x\\) is the difference
  between the spring's natural length and its current length.
  If a spring has natural length \\(10\\) inches, and it requires
  \\(15\\) pounds of force to hold the spring at \\(13\\) inches,
  how much work is required to stretch the spring an additional
  \\(2\\) inches?

### 3.5.3 Work and Pumping Liquid

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/682QxafIkv4" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe><!-- TODO could be streamlined -->

- To compute the work in pumping liquid, we proceed by computing a
  work differential \\(dW\\) for each infintesimal cross-section of liquid
  at height \\(y\\), and then evaluating \\(W=\int_{y=a}^{y=b} dW\\)
  where \\(y=a\\) is the lowest point of liquid and \\(y=b\\) is the
  highest.
    - \\(dV = (\text{area})dy\\)
    - \\(dF = (\text{density})dV\\)
    - \\(dW = (\text{distance})dF\\)
- **Example** Assume salt water weighs \\(10,000\\) newtons per
  cubic meter. How much work is required to pump out a conical tank
  pointed downward
  of height \\(6\\) meters and radius \\(3\\) meters, if it is initially
  filled with \\(4\\) feet of salt water?

---

### Review Exercises

1.  Estimate the work done in pushing a plow \\(6\\) meters through
    increasingly packed dirt; this movement requires \\(1\\) newton of force
    at the beginning, \\(5\\) newtons of force after \\(2\\) meters,
    and \\(9\\) netwons of force after \\(4\\) meters.
2.  Compute the exact amount of work done in pushing a plow \\(6\\) meters
    through increasingly packed dirt; this movement requires
    \\(F(x)=1+2x\\) newtons of force after \\(x\\) meters.
3.  Find the work done in lifting a leaky bucket from the ground to
    a height of four feet, assuming it weighs
    \\(25-x\\) pounds at \\(x\\) feet above the ground.
4.  A cable weighing \\(4\\) pounds per foot holds a \\(500\\) pound bucket of
    coal at the bottom of a \\(300\\) foot mine shaft. Show that the
    total work done in lifting the cable and bucket is
    \\(330,000\\) foot-pounds.
5.  Hooke's Law states that the force required to hold
    a stretched or compressed spring is directly proportional to its
    natural length. That is, \\(F(x)=kx\\) where \\(x\\) is the difference
    between the spring's natural length and its current length.
    Show that if a spring has natural length \\(20\\) cm, and it requires
    \\(25\\) newtons of force to hold the spring at \\(15\\) cm,
    then the work required to stretch the spring from its natural length
    to \\(26\\) cm is \\(90\\) N-cm.
6.  A uniformly weighted \\(100\\) foot rope weighs \\(50\\) pounds.
    Suppose it is fully extended into a well, tied to a leaky bucket of
    water. This bucket weighs \\(10\\) pounds and
    initially holds \\(30\\) pounds of water,
    but loses \\(1\\) pound of water every \\(2\\) feet. Show that
    the work done in lifting the rope and bucket is \\(4400\\) ft-lbs.
    (Hint: When does the bucket run out of water?)
7.  Assume salt water weighs \\(10\\) kilonewtons (kN) per cubic meter.
    A cylindrical tank with a radius of \\(3\\) meters and a height of
    \\(10\\) meters holds \\(8\\) meters of salt water. Show that
    the work required to pump out the salt water to the top of the tank
    is \\(4320\pi\\) kN-m (kJ).
8.  Assume salt water weighs \\(10000\\) newtons per cubic meter.
    A pyramid-shaped tank of height \\(4\\) meters is pointed upward,
    with a square base of side length \\(4\\) meters, and is completely
    filled with salt water. Show that the
    work done in completely pumping all the water in the tank up to the
    point of the pyramid is \\(10000\int_0^4(4-y)^3\,dy\\) J.
9.  Assume that a cubic inch of Juicy Juice™ weighs \\(D\\) oz.
    Suppose a perfectly spherical coconut-shaped cup with radius \\(R\\)
    inches is completely filled with Juicy Juice™. Show that drinking
    the entire beverage using a straw which extends \\(S\\) inches above
    the top of the container requires
    \\(\frac{4}{3}D\pi R^3(R+S)\\) inch-ounces of work.
10. What is the work required to push a heavy box \\(3\\) meters over
    an irregular surface, assuming it requires \\(F(x)=3+2x-x^2\\) newtons
    of force to move at \\(x\\) meters?
11. What integral gives the work in ft-lbs
    required to pull up a hanging \\(30\\)-pound \\(15\\)-foot chain?
12. What integral gives the work in kN-m required to
    pump out all salt-water to the top of a cubical tank with side length
    \\(4\\) meters, if it is initially half-full? Assume the
    density of salt water is \\(10\\) kilonewtons per cubic meter.

[Solutions 1-6](/resources/calculus2/solutions/3.5a.pdf)

[Solutions 7-12](/resources/calculus2/solutions/3.5b.pdf)

---

#### Textbook References

- University Calculus: Early Transcendentals (3rd Ed)
    - 6.5
