---
layout: page
title: Section 2.6 Calculus 2
header-img: "/assets/img/cal2-bg.png"
description: Strategies for Integration
---

[Back to Table of Contents](../..)

---

## 2.6 Strategies for Integration

### 2.6.1 Identifying Appropriate Integration Strategies

- When encountering an integration problem, it's useful to spot
  certain traits which can identify the best integration method
  to apply. The following list isn't fool-proof, but checking these
  in order can help you identify likely techniques for integration.
    1. **Use algebra** to simplify the integrand first, if possible.
       Split up sums into separate integrals as necessary.
    2. Is the integrand a sum of constant multiples of known derivatives
       or polynomials? If so, simply integrate using **Calculus 1 techniques**.
    3. Is the integral of the form \\(\int cf(g(x))g'(x)\,dx\\):
       a nested function along with (a constant multiple of)
       its derivative?
       If so, use **integration by substitution** with \\(u=g(x)\\).
       (Section 2.1)
    4. Is the integrand a rational function (a fraction of two polynomials)?
       If so, try the **method of partial fractions**
       to expand the integrand algebraically. (Section 2.4)
    5. Does the integrand include only trigonometric functions?
       **Use trigonometric identities** to allow for a direct substitution.
       (Section 2.2)
    6. Does the integrand include expressions of the form \\(a+bx^2\\),
       \\(a-bx^2\\), or \\(bx^2-a\\)? Use the method of **trigonometric
       substitution** to simplify. (Section 2.3)
    7. Is the integrand the product of two functions? **Integration by
       parts** may produce a more manageable integral.
       (Section 2.5)
    8. At this point, check to make sure you didn't miss a possibility
       above. Otherwise, you may need to use a combination of techniques
       from the above to proceed.

 <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/3pL_XEYmFp8" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

- **Example** Find \\(\int\sinh x\sqrt{1+\cosh x}\,dx\\).
- **Example** Find \\(\int 2ze^{3z}\,dz\\).
- **Example** Find \\(\int\sin^2 \theta+\cos^2 \theta\,d\theta\\).
- **Example** Find \\(\int\frac{5x^2+12}{x^3+4x}\,dx\\).

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/0_lntllVxZ4" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

- **Example** Find \\(\int3\sec y\tan y-\frac{1}{1+y^2}\,dy\\).
- **Example** Find \\(\int\frac{1}{\sqrt{4-9t^2}}\,dt\\).
- **Example** Find \\(\int\sin^2 x\cos^3 x\,dx\\).

---

### Exercises for 2.6

For each of the following integrals in problems 1-7,
first choose the most appropriate
technique to begin integration. Then do the integration.

1.  \\(\int(x^2-1)(x^2+1)\,dx\\).
1.  \\(\int\frac{1}{\sqrt{9+z^2}}\,dz\\). (Recall
    \\(\int\sec\theta\,d\theta=\ln\|\sec\theta+\tan\theta\|+C\\).)
1.  \\(\int 6y^2e^{y^3}\,dy\\).
1.  \\(\int 3x\sin(4x)\,dx\\).
1.  \\(\int\sec^3 \theta\tan^3 \theta\,d\theta\\).
1.  \\(\int\frac{5x-5}{x^2-3x-4}\,dx\\).
1.  \\(\int (4\sqrt{t}-3\tan(t)\sec(t))\,dt\\).
8.  Find \\(\int e^x\sqrt{1-e^{2x}}\,dx\\) using a variation
    (Hint: \\(\sin(2\theta)=2\sin\theta\cos\theta\\).)
9.  Match each of these five integrals with the most appropriate of the
    integration technique to begin integration. Each technique from the
    below list will be used exactly once.
    1. \\(\int\frac{4x}{x^2+3}\,dx\\)
    1. \\(\int\cos^3(x)\,dx\\)
    1. \\(\int\frac{5}{2x^2+8}\,dx\\)
    1. \\(\int\frac{x}{\csc(x)}\,dx\\)
    1. \\(\int\frac{4x^2+x+3}{x^3+3x^2}\,dx\\)
10. Match each of these five integrals with the most appropriate of the
    integration technique to begin integration. Each technique from the
    below list will be used exactly once.
    1. \\(\int\sec^5(y)\tan^3(y)\,dy\\)
    1. \\(\int\frac{\sin(y)}{1-2\cos(y)}\,dy\\)
    1. \\(\int\frac{y^2+4y}{(y^2+4)(y+2)}\,dy\\)
    1. \\(\int\sqrt{4y^2-9}\,dy\\)
    1. \\(\int\cos(y)\sinh(y)\,dy\\)

Choose from the following techniques for problems 9 & 10:

- Integration by Substitution
- Method of Partial Fractions
- Trigonometric Identities
- Trigonometric Substitution
- Integration by Parts



[Solutions]({{site.baseurl}}public/solutions/2.6.pdf)

---

#### Textbook References

- University Calculus: Early Transcendentals (3rd Ed)
    - Review of 5.5, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4
